---
layout: post
title: "Become the Biggest"
date: 2012-09-22 18:28
comments: true
categories: Osmos
---

You could play Osmos with no more instruction: the imperative to grow will guide you naturally
and inexorably. Despite its simplicity, Osmos does insist on spelling everything out in tutorial levels. I
really enjoy early learning stages in games, especially the ones that teach you about the world, rather than
the control scheme. I'm usually not pleased when English language words appear on the screen telling me
to tap X rapidly or whatnot. Unless the appearance of language is consistent with the theme of the game,
(like in Analogue, for example) this can be a real turn off. I'm going to go into some detail about the tutorial
levels (there are two) because I think Osmos is an excellent example of how easily a great beginning can
turn foul.

Starting a game with a quote by a physicist or philosopher is a great idea: it sets the stage, and fills my mind
with well grounded ideas. No better way to quickly build a framework in which a player's understanding
of the theme and action can grow, than by analogy. Osmos begins with a quote by Newton that has acquired
great cultural weight, and has as much meaning in ethics as it does in physics. Great first moment.

Then, fade in to a beautiful blue orb, pulsing and swimming with activity. What is this? Is this the universe? Is this
life itself, or God? No, the game corrects us: "This is you". Beautiful! OK! Now I know what kind of game
this is and who I am, just give me a goal and I'm off!

Aiming for the home run, Osmos zooms out, and shows us what we need to do: "Propel yourself to the blue
circle and come to a stop". For me, a smooth introduction like this is the sweetest thing. I rarely
play games to their conclusion, and I judge very quickly. Ambient music, soft blue colour-scheme, and
simple direct instructions are exactly everything that I need. So, having been told what I am and
where to go, naturally I start clicking.

Nothing... click, click, click! Wait what? But I thought every action had an equal and opposite reaction?
Shouldn't something happen when I click? Oh wait... I see what's up. Osmos doesn't care if I understand what
I am and where I should go: it is too humble (or something) to anticipate that I could have understood by now
just based on the theme and visuals. So, reluctantly, I press the space bar one more time.

"*Hey, listen!* You navigate by aligning the cursor behind you and pressing the left mouse button"

Arglebargle!!! I love Osmos: great game. I'm just so, so, so disappointed when that little sprite
shows up in every game I play to remind me of what I already know. I've never read a novel or watched a
film that presumed the need to explain the medium: yet every second video game does this. Especially
considering that Osmos was released for a platform with exactly one button -- your finger -- which can only
be used to 'tip-tap'... it is very sad that I'm not allowed to play until that vile spectre has made my
means of agency explicit.

The rest of the instructions -- that is, to absorb small motes and avoid big ones -- are also unnecessary
in the post katamari damaci world. Especially when the reds of warning are so vivid, and the peaceful blues
so soft and attractive. Nothing in the world could be more evident, once you have understood that 'this is you'. If
that's me, and that big red ball isn't me, then there is no way I'm going anywhere near it. I'll go chill
with these little blue balls I can shove around. Oh shit I got bigger! Ha, and the red ball changed color! Time
to win!

See: no need to instruct. Hey! Are you listening?

Ok that's the last I will complain about what I see as Osmos's only flaw (a tiny tiny flaw). Tune in next
time for my otherwise 100% positive opinion of the rest of Osmos.


